Add Web Export in 4.3 progress report article (#843)
godotengine/godot-website: collections/_article/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3.md

---
title: "Web Export in 4.3"
excerpt: "With single-threaded builds and sample playback, it's now easier than ever to export your game to the Web with Godot 4.3. And more!"
categories: ["progress-report"]
author: Adam Scott
image: /storage/blog/covers/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3.webp
image_caption_title: "Catburglar"
image_caption_description: "An open source game by @JohnGabrielUK and his team"
date: 2024-05-13 17:00:00
---

Have you ever begun some type of work, and only after realized how little you actually knew?
That happened to me during [the last <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr>](https://godotengine.org/article/gdc-2024-retrospective/).

A few months ago, [Fabio Alessandrelli (@faless)](https://github.com/Faless/) and I switched positions:
I took over his responsibilities as [Web Platform Lead](https://godotengine.org/teams/#platforms) for Godot to reduce

> his task load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few months ago, I took over [Fabio Alessandrelli's (@faless)](https://github.com/Faless/) responsibilities as [Web Platform Lead](https://godotengine.org/teams/#platforms) for Godot to reduce his task load and accelerate the pace at which our web platform exports continue to improve.
```

I think this simplifies and clarifies the point a bit more. Saying "switched positions" is a bit confusing as it implies that Fabio is now doing your job

I'm well used to the Web and its quirks. I began creating websites in
<abbr title="Extensible Hypertext Markup Language">XHTML</abbr> and (vanilla) JavaScript, back in the days.
Flash games were my jam! Enough so that I even worked for a video game studio as an ActionScript 3 developer in 2010.
And I didn't really stop caring about the Web platform ever since.

Since then, Flash may have died, but online games didn't.

# The new situation
But what I realized at the <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr> is that we're entering in sort into a
Golden Age of Web games. Not only websites like [Poki](https://poki.com/) or
[Crazy Games](https://www.crazygames.com/) are super popular, but big players are starting to integrate Web games into
their services, such as
[Discord Activities](https://support.discord.com/hc/en-us/articles/4422142836759-Activities-on-Discord)
or [YouTube Playables](https://www.youtube.com/playables). And all these entities want developers to create games for

> their platform. And they are all asking how Godot could help create fast-loading "instant games".

Reviewer: I'd be cautious making this statement. We don't have "instant games" on the roadmap and this sounds like it we might be working towards making instant games possible.

Consider:
```suggestion
their platform. And they are all asking how Godot can bring a first-class development experience to their platform.
```

Author: You repeat twice "their platform". Is this OK?

> All these entities want developers to create games for their platform, and they are all asking how Godot can bring a first-class development experience to it.

Reviewer: Sounds great to me

# Godot 4.3

> Making games for the Web using Godot can be a challenge, especially on 4.x, and that means serious revisions are needed.
> Godot 4.3 promises to be one of the best recent releases about Web exports. One of the biggest issues relating to this

Reviewer: Just some clarification here. The experience in Godot 3.x is pretty good and its what we are aiming for with 4.x. And the problem is not making games per se, its really just the experience of shipping games on all platforms (particularly MacOS). When you are developing on Windows or linux the entire process is great until a Mac user tries to run your game. 

```suggestion
Making games for the Web using Godot 4.x still isn't as seamless as we would like it to be. Unfortunately serious revisions are needed to improve the experience to the extent that we want.
Godot 4.3 promises to be one of the best recent releases for Web exports. One of the biggest issues relating to this
```

has been properly fixed: single-threaded exports.

## Single-threaded Web export

### Betting on the wrong horse
[`SharedArrayBuffer`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/SharedArrayBuffer)s
were supposed to revolutionize the Web. And they did. That API permits to share memory between
[Web Workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Using_web_workers)
(which are the Web native "threads").

> Unfortunately, we live in the same timeline that of [Spectre and Meltdown exploits](https://meltdownattack.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, we live in the same timeline that includes the [Spectre and Meltdown exploits](https://meltdownattack.com/).
```

The result of this is that [browsers greatly reduced where and how you can use that API](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/enabling-shared-array-buffer?hl=en).
Namely, browsers nowadays require websites to be [cross-origin isolated](https://web.dev/coop-coep/). When isolated, it
does unlock the potential of `SharedArrayBuffer`s, but at what cost?

At the cost of having the capacity to make remote calls to other websites. _Adieu_ game monetization. _Adieu_
interacting with an external API.

The issue is that during the development of Godot 4, we bet on
the wrong horse: we went all-in with using threads with `SharedArrayBuffer`s. We minimized the cost of using
cross-origin isolated websites. Sadly, it made it so that

> [Winterpixel Games](https://www.winterpixel.com/) (makers of [Rocket Bot Royale](https://rocketbotroyale.winterpixel.io/)
> and [Goober Dash](https://gooberdash.winterpixel.io/)) were unfortunately stuck on Godot 3.x, which supports
> running games on the main thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Winterpixel Games](https://www.winterpixel.com/) (makers of [Rocket Bot Royale](https://rocketbotroyale.winterpixel.io/)
and [Goober Dash](https://gooberdash.winterpixel.io/)) (and many other commercial game studio's like them) were unfortunately stuck on Godot 3.x, which supports
running games on the main thread.
```

Author: I changed the sentence entirely, to focus on the experience of exporting games on itch.io and other websites, as suggested by @akien-mga.

> We know been a hurdle for a lot of users trying to publish their jam games on [itch.io](https://itch.io), or for some other web game platforms which don't allow configuring headers for `SharedArrayBuffer` support.

this change. Fortunately, with the help of our thread guru
[Pedro J. Estébanez (@RandomShaper)](https://github.com/RandomShaper), I was able to tame the beast and put back single-
threaded builds.

[My <abbr title="Pull Request">PR</abbr>](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/85939) was finally merged at the
beginning of the Godot 4.3 development period.

![Web export thread support option](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/thread-support-export-option.webp)

It even had some unexpected benefits. Apple devices (macOS and iOS) were long known to have issues when playing Godot
Web exports. Well, when you do export your game single-threaded, these issues fortunately disappear.

However, it came with a downside too: it introduced a new, virtually unsolvable bug:

The single-threaded build introduced garbles in the audio of games, making them unplayable on low-end machines such as
laptops or phones.

When I mean unplayable on low-end machines, I mean it.
[Try it yourself.](https://adamscott.github.io/truck-town-demo-main-thread/){:target="_blank"}
(Consider yourself lucky if it doesn't glitch out.)

> Yes. Web single-threaded stream playback on Godot 4.x is that bad. It is marginally better on Godot 3.x, but the problem
> exist there nontheless.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes. Web single-threaded audio stream playback with Godot 4.2 is that bad. It is marginally better on Godot 3.x, but the problem
exist there as well.
```

and even if it works pretty well, if you ask me, it still is pretty much a prototype. But we can't just release Godot 4.3
without proper audio support for single-threaded releases.

So it has been decided that it should be treated as _experimental_. More work will be done before the release of Godot 4.4
in order to stabilize the API and how it works under the hood.

### Call to action
But even before thinking about Godot 4.4, I must call for your help! We need people to test out [the sample playback <abbr title="Pull Request">PR</abbr>](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/85939)
until the release.

If you encounter any issue while testing my PR or while testing out the single-threaded samples builds, please report
them [here](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/85939).

Finally, if you still intend to continue using threads on the Web platform, you can! And the next feature should aid you
setup your game online.

## Easy <abbr title="Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy">COOP</abbr>-<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy">COEP</abbr> <abbr title="Progressive Web App">PWA</abbr> for threaded builds

> With this new feature, if you still need to export your game with thread support, you'll are able to activate the necessary
> <abbr title="Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy">COOP</abbr>/<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy">COEP</abbr> headers
> without having to modifiy the server's header responses. You'll need to export your game as a Progressive Web App though.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this new feature, if you still need to export your game with thread support, you are able to activate the necessary
<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy">COOP</abbr>/<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy">COEP</abbr> headers
without having to modify the server's header responses. You'll need to export your game as a Progressive Web App though.
```

![Ensure Cross-Origin Isolation Headers export option](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/ensure-cross-origin-isolation-headers.webp)

> This is because this export option setup the Service Worker, included with the <abbr title="Progressive Web App">PWA</abbr>
> build, to intercept the requests from the server and inject those missing
> <abbr title="Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy">COOP</abbr>-<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy">COEP</abbr> headers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because this export option sets up the Service Worker, included with the <abbr title="Progressive Web App">PWA</abbr>
build, to intercept the requests from the server and inject those missing
<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy">COOP</abbr>-<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy">COEP</abbr> headers.
```

## Boot splash screen
Just before the beta feature freeze deadline, [@patwork](https://github.com/patwork), a new
[#web](https://chat.godotengine.org/channel/web) contributor,

> include [some neat features](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/91128):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
included [some neat features](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/91128):
```

tag.

But, mainly and from now on, he made the boot splash screen set in the project settings to be displayed on the screen
while the engine and the assets are getting loaded by the browser.

![New Godot Web loading screen](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/loading-screen.gif)

If no boot splash screen has been set, the classic Godot boot splash will be seen, as it is currently displayed on
other platforms.

# Next steps
Don't worry, these changes only mark the beginning for the Godot Engine to truly offer game developers a great and
reliable way to create Web games.

So work will be done to finalize and stabilize the samples playback for the Web. In the future, the node chain system
should be powerful enough to support audio effects on buses, so we intend to work on this too.

Based on the feedback we received at the <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr> from partners and friends,
we know that we need a way to reduce the size of our exports. Currently, the 4.3 release Web build .wasm is around 50MB.
This is the engine only, without any assets. This may feel small nowadays, especially with gigabytes we're used to see

> on desktop and console games, but it is way too large for Web "instant games".

Reviewer: I would avoid mentioning instant games at all. For the most part users aren't asking for instant game support, they just want decent support to run their games on itch.io. instant games are a whole other can of worms

```suggestion
on desktop and console games, but it is way too large for Web games.
```

We have a few ideas in mind to address this, and it could even help optimize builds for other platforms!

If you know C/C++, you're familiar with the Web APIs and you feel contributing,
don't hesitate to join our
[#web team](https://chat.godotengine.org/channel/web) on the

> [Godot Engine developers chat](https://chat.godotengine.org).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Godot Engine developers chat](https://chat.godotengine.org).

## Support

Godot is a non-profit, open source game engine developed by hundreds of contributors on their free time, as well as a handful of part or full-time developers hired thanks to [generous donations from the Godot community](https://fund.godotengine.org/). A big thank you to everyone who has contributed [their time](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/AUTHORS.md) or [their financial support](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/blob/master/DONORS.md) to the project!

If you'd like to support the project financially and help us secure our future hires, you can do so using the [Godot Development Fund](https://fund.godotengine.org/) platform managed by [Godot Foundation](https://godot.foundation/). There are also several [alternative ways to donate](/donate) which you may find more suitable.
```

image: /storage/blog/covers/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3.webp
image_caption_title: "Catburglar"
image_caption_description: "An open source game by @JohnGabrielUK and his team"
date: 2024-05-14 12:00:00
---

Have you ever begun some type of work, and only after realized how little you actually knew?
That happened to me during [the last <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr>](https://godotengine.org/article/gdc-2024-retrospective/).

A few months ago, I took over [Fabio Alessandrelli's (@faless)](https://github.com/Faless/) responsibilities as
[Web Platform Lead](https://godotengine.org/teams/#platforms) for Godot to reduce his task load and accelerate the pace
at which our Web platform exports continue to improve.

I'm well used to the Web and its quirks. I began creating websites in
<abbr title="Extensible Hypertext Markup Language">XHTML</abbr> and (vanilla) JavaScript, back in the days.
Flash games were my jam! Enough so that I even worked for a video game studio as an ActionScript 3 developer in 2010.
And I didn't really stop caring about the Web platform ever since.

Since then, Flash may have died, but online games didn't.

# The new situation

> But what I realized at the <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr> is that we're entering in sort into a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But what I realized at the <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr> is that we're entering into a sort of
```

### Betting on the wrong horse
[`SharedArrayBuffer`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/SharedArrayBuffer)s
were supposed to revolutionize the Web. And they did. That API permits to share memory between
[Web Workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Using_web_workers)
(which are the Web native "threads").

Unfortunately, we live in the same timeline that includes the [Spectre and Meltdown exploits](https://meltdownattack.com/).

The result of this is that [browsers greatly reduced where and how you can use that API](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/enabling-shared-array-buffer?hl=en).
Namely, browsers nowadays require websites to be [cross-origin isolated](https://web.dev/coop-coep/). When isolated, it
does unlock the potential of `SharedArrayBuffer`s, but at what cost?

At the cost of having the capacity to make remote calls to other websites. _Adieu_ game monetization. _Adieu_
interacting with an external API.

The issue is that during the development of Godot 4, we bet on
the wrong horse: we went all-in with using threads with `SharedArrayBuffer`s. We minimized the cost of using

> cross-origin isolated websites.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the wrong horse: we went all-in with using threads with `SharedArrayBuffer`s.
We thought it was mainly a question of [browser support](https://caniuse.com/sharedarraybuffer) (which took a step back due to the aforementioned security issues), so when all browsers finally shipped stable releases with `SharedArrayBuffer`, we streamlined everything around multi-threading.
```

Author: Way better worded. Thanks Rémi!

> We know been a hurdle for a lot of users trying to publish their jam games on [itch.io](https://itch.io),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But we underestimated the difficulty of configuring cross-origin isolated websites.
We know it has been a hurdle for a lot of users trying to publish their jam games on [itch.io](https://itch.io), which has an experimental `SharedArrayBuffer` option, but relying upon another feature ([`coep:credentialless`](https://caniuse.com/mdn-http_headers_cross-origin-embedder-policy_credentialless)) not supported by Safari or Firefox for Android).
Likewise, most Web games are being published on third-party publishing platforms where the game authors may not even be able to set the required headers for `SharedArrayBuffer` support.
```

This was not easy because 4.0 was made with threads in mind. It maybe explains why we were so hesitant to go ahead with
this change. Fortunately, with the help of our thread guru
[Pedro J. Estébanez (@RandomShaper)](https://github.com/RandomShaper), I was able to tame the beast and put back single-
threaded builds.

[My <abbr title="Pull Request">PR</abbr>](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/85939) was finally merged at the
beginning of the Godot 4.3 development period.

![Web export thread support option](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/thread-support-export-option.webp)

It even had some unexpected benefits. Apple devices (macOS and iOS) were long known to have issues when playing Godot
Web exports. Well, when you do export your game single-threaded, these issues fortunately disappear.

However, it came with a downside too: it introduced a new, virtually unsolvable bug:

The single-threaded build introduced garbles in the audio of games, making them unplayable on low-end machines such as
laptops or phones.

When I mean unplayable on low-end machines, I mean it.
[Try it yourself.](https://adamscott.github.io/truck-town-demo-main-thread/){:target="_blank"}

> (Consider yourself lucky if it doesn't glitch out.)

Reviewer 2: It's actually not specific to low-end machines. I have this issue on high end laptops and phones, specifically because the native framerate is high and thus frame time is short and can lead to skipping frames in the audio mixing.

Yes. Web single-threaded audio stream playback with Godot 4.2 is that bad. It is marginally better on Godot 3.x, but the

> problem exist there as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
problem exists there as well.
```

## Sample playback to the rescue!
[Here comes my <abbr title="Pull Request">PR</abbr>](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/91382) (not yet merged at

> the time of writing) for the rescue. [Here's the same demo without sound issues.](https://adamscott.github.io/truck-town-main-thread-samples/){:target="_blank"}

Reviewer 2: So... this demo actually has pretty bad sound issues for me on Linux in Firefox (relatively beefy laptop).

https://github.com/godotengine/godot-website/assets/4701338/75e5467d-2a6d-458b-93c8-3df5f3039e41

(low res but you can hear the crackling background noise before and after driving)

Overall, Truck Town's audio is problematic in various ways (too saturated, effects created from code that seem to work differently based on the platform), so I would really suggest picking a different demo to showcase the before / after.

Author: I chose to come back to the Platformer2D demo, even if there's Safari issues.

### What are samples?
Using samples for games is not a novel idea. In fact, for a long time, it was the _de facto_ way to play sound and music
on game consoles. As they didn't have the processing power to do the mixing on the CPU, you could send audio clips
(hence the term "sample") to a special chip and tell it how and when to play them.

> Since the audio chip was operating on it's own, the sound would never lag nor glitch out if the game is lagging.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the audio chip was operating on its own, the sound would never lag nor glitch out if the game is lagging.
```

### (Re)introducing samples to Godot
When open sourced, the Godot engine offered two ways to emit sound and music: streams and samples. Sample support was used for

> the Web exports and for platforms such as the <abbr title="PlayStation Portable">PSP</abbr>.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure that's the whole story. AFAIK back in 2.1 you used Samples for sfx (wav) and Streams for music (ogg), on all platforms.

Author: Oh, interesting.

![The long gone SampleLibrary resource and SamplePlayer2D node on Godot 2.1](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/sample-library.webp)

But when Godot 3 released, it was decided that samples support was not needed anymore. Game consoles nowadays ask
developers to mix themselves the audio using the CPU. And for the Web, we could mix the audio using a dedicated thread,
like other platforms since `SharedArrayBuffer`s exist.

This is why there's audio garbles in single-threaded builds (without my "fix"). Audio rendering is tied with the frame-
rate. And if it drops, there's not enough audio frames to fill out the buffer, hence the glitches.

What [my <abbr title="Pull Request">PR</abbr>](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/85939) does is to reinstate
sample playback. At least at the time of writing, for the Web platform only.

### Near seamless integration
Unfortunately, the way it was implemented in Godot 2.1, at least, was that you _had_ to choose between streams or samples.

> What I mean is that you had to choose between `AudioStreamNode`s or `AudioSampleNode`s. That meant custom code to handle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What I mean is that you had to choose between `StreamPlayer` or `SamplePlayer` nodes. That meant custom code to handle
```

> which node to play, or even worse, separate projects for Web projects.

Reviewer 2: I don't think that's accurate, again based on the fact that samples were used for SFX and streams for music. I don't recall about people specifically using samples for music on web, but the web platform was quite different at the time:

- 2.1 had its own AudioServerJavascript for the web.
- Browsers at the time supported [ScriptProcessorNode](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ScriptProcessorNode), which worked decently. The audio woes started with them dropping support for ScriptProcessorNode in Chromium.

CC @Faless

Author: I think `ScriptProcessorNode` was deprecated, but it should still work today. But who in their right minds would want to still use deprecated code.

Author: I removed these sentences entirely. Fixed!

> Even worse, `AudioSampleNode`s had `SampleLibrary`s that you had to populate with samples separately. Not the easiest way

Reviewer 2: It's `AudioSample`/`AudioStream` _resources_, and `SamplePlayer`/`StreamPlayer` _nodes_.

to do.

From the get-go, it was something that we ruled out: we couldn't simply port how it was done in 2.1, we needed a more
intuitive way.

Then, I hacked samples into stream. I more or less hijacked the streams API to insert samples support. Simple as
that!

![AudioStreamPlayer playback type property](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/playback-type.webp)

> `AudioStreamPlayer`, `AudioStreamPlayer2D`, and `AudioStreamPlayer3D` new property "Playback Type" determines how these

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`AudioStreamPlayer`, `AudioStreamPlayer2D`, and `AudioStreamPlayer3D` have a new "Playback Type" property which determines how these
```

nodes will behave behind the scenes. You can choose between "Stream", "Sample", and "Default".

![Default playback type project settings](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/default-playback-type.webp)

Fortunately, "Default" uses the new default project settings value `audio/general/default_playback_type`, so on the Web,

> the project will use "Sample" and the rest of the releases will use "Stream".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the project will use "Sample" and the rest of the platforms will keep using "Stream".
```

it possible to recreate somewhat accurately the mixing happening on the Godot side with streams.

![A screenshot of Catburglar Web Audio nodes.](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/web-audio-schema.webp)

Here's an image showing the Web audio nodes of the intro scene of [Catburglar](https://johngabrieluk.itch.io/catburglar),
the open-source game featured on the cover. It is where all the samples are getting mixed.

From the right to the left of that image, you have the destination node (the audio output),
then the master bus (represented by a chain of nodes). Plugged to the master bus are the rest of the audio buses
determined by the project. All the buses have multiple `GainNode`s to handle actual gain, solo and mute.

Then, you see a sample chain, with its weird splitter and merger nodes. This is where the magic happens.

Each cycle, for mixing the streams, Godot calculates the volume of each audio channel. As Godot supports up to
7.1 surround (5.1 surround on the Web), it must know how loud to actually play the stream in the left and right speaker,
the center one, the <abbr title="Low-frequency effects">LFE</abbr>, and so on. All according to the volume,

> position and orientation of the node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
position, and orientation of the node.
```

> So, to handle all of that on the Web Audio side, we just have to send those values to each channel, and it just works.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, to handle all of that on the Web Audio side, we send those values to each channel, and it just works.
```

and even if it works pretty well, if you ask me, it still is pretty much a prototype. But we can't just release Godot 4.3
without proper audio support for single-threaded releases.

So it has been decided that it should be treated as _experimental_. More work will be done before the release of Godot 4.4
in order to stabilize the API and how it works under the hood.

### Call to action
But even before thinking about Godot 4.4, I must call for your help! We need people to test out [the sample playback <abbr title="Pull Request">PR</abbr>](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/85939)
until the release.

If you encounter any issue while testing my PR or while testing out the single-threaded samples builds, please report
them [here](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/85939).

Finally, if you still intend to continue using threads on the Web platform, you can! And the next feature should aid you
setup your game online.

## Easy <abbr title="Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy">COOP</abbr>-<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy">COEP</abbr> <abbr title="Progressive Web App">PWA</abbr> for threaded builds

> With this new feature, if you still need to export your game with thread support, you'll are able to activate the necessary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this new feature, if you still need to export your game with thread support, you'll be able to activate the necessary
```

<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy">COOP</abbr>/<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy">COEP</abbr> headers
without having to modify the server's header responses. You'll need to export your game as a Progressive Web App though.

![Ensure Cross-Origin Isolation Headers export option](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/ensure-cross-origin-isolation-headers.webp)

This is because this export option sets up the Service Worker, included with the <abbr title="Progressive Web App">PWA</abbr>
build, to intercept the requests from the server and inject those missing
<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy">COOP</abbr>-<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy">COEP</abbr> headers.

## Boot splash screen
Just before the beta feature freeze deadline, [@patwork](https://github.com/patwork), a new
[#web](https://chat.godotengine.org/channel/web) contributor,
included [some neat features](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/91128):

He cleaned up the game page code and he updated the progress bar to use the semantic (and very useful) HTML `<progress>`
tag.

> But, mainly and from now on, he made the boot splash screen set in the project settings to be displayed on the screen
> while the engine and the assets are getting loaded by the browser.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what "mainly and from now on" is meant to convey, but it sounds awkward.
Maybe:
```suggestion
But, most importantly, he made the boot splash screen set in the project settings to be displayed on the screen
while the engine and the assets are getting loaded by the browser.
```

The rest of the sentence still sounds a bit weird, could be worth fully rewriting, e.g.:
```suggestion
Most importantly, the project's configured boot splash screen will now be displayed while the engine and the assets are being loaded by the browser.
```

![New Godot Web loading screen](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/loading-screen.gif)

If no boot splash screen has been set, the classic Godot boot splash will be seen, as it is currently displayed on
other platforms.

# Next steps
Don't worry, these changes only mark the beginning for the Godot Engine to truly offer game developers a great and
reliable way to create Web games.

> So work will be done to finalize and stabilize the samples playback for the Web. In the future, the node chain system

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Further work will be done to finalize and stabilize the samples playback for the Web. In the future, the node chain system
```

should be powerful enough to support audio effects on buses, so we intend to work on this too.

Based on the feedback we received at the <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr> from partners and friends,

> we know that we need a way to reduce the size of our exports. Currently, the 4.3 release Web build .wasm is around 50MB.

Reviewer 2: I have it at 40 MB here for the `web_nothreads_release` template, as of 4.3.dev4 (don't have newer templates installed to check quickly).

When compressed with Brotli, it's 5MB. Compressed with zip, it's 8MB.

So I wouldn't just say "50 MB" and let people assume that it means any time you download a Godot game you're downloading a 50 MB payload.

```suggestion
we know that we need a way to reduce the size of our exports. Currently, the 4.3 release Web build .wasm is around 40 MB uncompressed, and 5 MB compressed with Brotli.
```

---
title: "Web Export in 4.3"
excerpt: "With single-threaded builds and sample playback, it's now easier than ever to export your game to the Web with Godot 4.3."
categories: ["progress-report"]
author: Adam Scott
image: /storage/blog/covers/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3.webp
image_caption_title: "Catburglar"
image_caption_description: "An open source game by @JohnGabrielUK and his team"
date: 2024-05-13 12:00:00
---

> Have you ever began some type of work, then realized after begining it how little you actually knew?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Have you ever begun some type of work, and only after realized how little you actually knew?
```

That happened to me during [the last <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr>](https://godotengine.org/article/gdc-2024-retrospective/).

> Before explaining what I missed, here's some context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> Since a few months now, [Fabio Alessandrelli (@faless)](https://github.com/Faless/) and I did a little switcheroo:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A few months ago, [Fabio Alessandrelli (@faless)](https://github.com/Faless/) and I switched positions:
```

> [I took his position](https://godotengine.org/teams/#platforms) as Web platform lead for Godot—the poor guy has already

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I took over his responsibilities as [Web-platform-Lead](https://godotengine.org/teams/#platforms) for Godot to reduce his task load.
```

> enough tasks at hand!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

I'm well used to the Web and its quirks. I began creating websites in
<abbr title="Extensible Hypertext Markup Language">XHTML</abbr> and (vanilla) JavaScript, back in the days.
Flash games were my jam! Enough so that I even worked for a video game studio as an ActionScript 3 developer in 2010.
And I didn't really stop caring about the Web platform ever since.

Since then, Flash may have died, but online games didn't.

> (And I knew that.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

Author: It may give the impression that I am a dinosaur that don't really know anything about web games.

> # My realization

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# The new situation
```

But what I realized at the <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr> is that we're entering in sort into a
Golden Age of Web games. Not only websites like [Poki](https://poki.com/) or
[Crazy Games](https://www.crazygames.com/) are super popular, but big players are starting to integrate Web games into
their services, such as
[Discord Activities](https://support.discord.com/hc/en-us/articles/4422142836759-Activities-on-Discord)
or [YouTube Playables](https://www.youtube.com/playables). And all these entities want developers to create games for
their platform. And they are all asking how Godot could help create these games.

> That was an eye opening moment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> I knew that making games for the Web using Godot was a challenge, especially on 4.x, and that serious work was needed.
> You can ask game jam participants that want their games playable on [itch.io](https://itch.io/), as this
> greatly help people play your game.
> 
> I always considered Web games to be an extension of existing desktop games, though.
> You made a game, and you can port it to the Web if you want. Worked fine (with said caveats) so far.
> 
> But "instant games" are more popular than ever, and their growth is just beginning. Web games promise quality gaming
> without having to download anything. No apps, no purchases needed.
> 
> Fortunately, I already had some work done towards fixing some of the long lasting issues with Godot 4.x regarding Web
> exports. The <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr> just hammered very hard on the fact that the Web
> platform to-do list was way longer than I imagined.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

# Godot 4.3

> Godot 4.3 promises to be one of the best recent releases about Web exports. One of the biggest issues relating to this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Making games for the Web using Godot can be a challenge, especially on 4.x, and that means serious revisions are needed. Godot 4.3 promises to be one of the best recent releases about Web exports. One of the biggest issues relating to this
```

has been properly fixed: single-threaded exports.

## Single-threaded Web export

### Betting on the wrong horse
[`SharedArrayBuffer`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/SharedArrayBuffer)s
were supposed to revolutionize the Web. And they did. That API permits to share memory between
[Web Workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Using_web_workers)
(which are the Web native "threads").

Unfortunately, we live in the same timeline that of [Spectre and Meltdown exploits](https://meltdownattack.com/).

The result of this is that browsers greatly reduced where and how you can use that API. Namely, browsers nowadays require
websites to be [cross-origin isolated](https://web.dev/coop-coep/). When isolated, it does unlock the potential of
`SharedArrayBuffer`s, but at what cost? The capacity to make remote calls to other websites.

_Adieu_ game monetization. _Adieu_ interacting with an external API.

> !["What did it cost? Everything." exchange between Gamora and Thanos in Avengers Infinity](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/thanos-gamora.gif)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> The thing is that during the development of Godot 4, misconceptions about the Web platform made it so that we bet on

Reviewer 3: What misconceptions? As someone not aware this only opens up questions instead of answering them

Author: Is this better?
> The thing is that during the development of Godot 4, we bet on the wrong horse: we went all-in with using threads with `SharedArrayBuffer`s.

Reviewer 3: Yes, but maybe "The issue is" to make it a tad more formal ;)

At the end of the development of Godot 4.2, [the Foundation](https://godot.foundation/) tasked me to find a way to backport
the ability to build Godot without using threads in order to export Godot games without the pesky
<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy">COOP</abbr>/<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy">COEP</abbr> headers.

This was not easy because 4.0 was made with threads in mind. It maybe explains why we were so hesitant to go ahead with
this change. Fortunately, with the help of our thread guru
[Pedro J. Estébanez (@RandomShaper)](https://github.com/RandomShaper), I was able to tame the beast and put back single-
threaded builds.

[My <abbr title="Pull Request">PR</abbr>](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/85939) was finally merged at the
beginning of the Godot 4.3 development period.

![Web export thread support option](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/thread-support-export-option.webp)

It even had some unexpected benefits. Apple devices (macOS and iOS) were long known to have issues when playing Godot
Web exports. Well, when you do export your game single-threaded, these issues fortunately disappear.

> But we couldn't really celebrate that much, as it introduced a new bug. A bug virtually unsolvable…
> 
> …until now.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, it came with a downside too: it introduced a new, virtually unsolvable bug:
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Explain the actual bug here pls, or move the next headline lower down

Author: I moved the headline lower down.

## Sample playback to the rescue!
The single-threaded build introduced garbles in the audio of games, making them unplayable on low-end machines such as
laptops or phones.

When I mean unplayable on low-end machines, I mean it.
[Try it yourself.](https://adamscott.github.io/truck-town-demo-main-thread/){:target="_blank"}
(Consider yourself lucky if it doesn't glitch out.)

> ![Squidward from Spongebob trying to put back is human ear inside his head](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/squidward-spongebob.gif)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

### What are samples?
Using samples for games is not a novel idea. In fact, for a long time, it was the _de facto_ way to play sound and music
on game consoles. As they didn't have the processing power to do the mixing on the CPU, you could send audio clips
(hence the term "sample") to a special chip and tell it how and when to play them.

Since the audio chip was operating on it's own, the sound would never lag nor glitch out if the game is lagging.

### (Re)introducing samples to Godot
When open sourced, the Godot engine offered two ways to emit sound and music: streams and samples. Sample support was used for
the Web exports and for platforms such as the <abbr title="PlayStation Portable">PSP</abbr>.

![The long gone SampleLibrary resource and SamplePlayer2D node on Godot 2.1](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/sample-library.webp)

But when Godot 3 released, it was decided that samples support was not needed anymore. Game consoles nowadays ask
developers to mix themselves the audio using the CPU. And for the Web, we could mix the audio using a dedicated thread,
like other platforms since `SharedArrayBuffer`s exist.

> Oh.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

This is because this export option setup the Service Worker, included with the <abbr title="Progressive Web App">PWA</abbr>
build, to intercept the requests from the server and inject those missing
<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Opener-Policy">COOP</abbr>-<abbr title="Cross-Origin-Embedder-Policy">COEP</abbr> headers.

## Boot splash screens
Just before the beta feature freeze deadline, [@patwork](https://github.com/patwork), a new
[#web](https://chat.godotengine.org/channel/web) contributor,
[managed to sneak up something really nice](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/91128):

He cleaned up the game page code and he updated the progress bar to use the semantic (and very useful) HTML `<progress>`
tag.

But, mainly and from now on, he made boot splash screens set in the project settings to be displayed on the screen
while the engine and the assets are getting loaded by the browser.

![New Godot Web loading screen](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/loading-screen.gif)

If no boot splash screen has been set, the classic Godot boot splash will be seen, as it is currently displayed on

> other platforms.

Reviewer 3: This is the only change that does not pertain to audio - in case we want to shorten the post further, I would remove and change the title to specifically state Web Audio as the topic

Author: No, the single-threaded web export for Godot is not audio-related per se.

Reviewer 3: Fair, then language review:

```suggestion
## Boot splash screens
Just before the beta feature freeze deadline, [@patwork](https://github.com/patwork), a new
[#web](https://chat.godotengine.org/channel/web) contributor,
managed to include [some neat features](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/91128):

He cleaned up the game page code and he updated the progress bar to use the semantic (and very useful) HTML `<progress>`
tag.

But, mainly and from now on, he made boot splash screens set in the project settings to be displayed on the screen
while the engine and the assets are getting loaded by the browser.

![New Godot Web loading screen](/storage/blog/progress-report-web-export-in-4-3/loading-screen.gif)

If no boot splash screen has been set, the classic Godot boot splash will be seen, as it is currently displayed on
other platforms.
```

> # What now?
> The <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr> made me realize that my todo list as the Web lead was bigger than expected.
> 
> Don't worry, it's only the beginning for the Godot Engine to truly offer game developers a great and reliable way to
> create Web games.
> 
> So work will be done to finalize and stabilize the samples playback for the Web. In the future, the node chain system
> should be powerful enough to support audio effects on buses, so we intend to work on this too.
> 
> Based on the feedback we received at the <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr> from partners and friends,
> we know that we need a way to reduce the size of our exports. Currently, the 4.3 release Web build .wasm is around 50MB.
> This is the engine only, without any assets. This may feel small nowadays, especially with gigabytes we're used to see
> on desktop and console games, but it is way too large for Web "instant games".
> 
> We have a few ideas in mind to address this, and it could even help optimize builds for other platforms!
> 
> But if you know C/C++, you're familiar with the Web APIs and you feel contributing,
> don't hesitate to join our
> [#web team](https://chat.godotengine.org/channel/web) on the
> [Godot Engine developers chat](https://chat.godotengine.org).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Next steps
Don't worry, these changes only mark the beginning for the Godot Engine to truly offer game developers a great and reliable way to create Web games.

So work will be done to finalize and stabilize the samples playback for the Web. In the future, the node chain system
should be powerful enough to support audio effects on buses, so we intend to work on this too.

Based on the feedback we received at the <abbr title="Game Developers Conference">GDC</abbr> from partners and friends,
we know that we need a way to reduce the size of our exports. Currently, the 4.3 release Web build .wasm is around 50MB.
This is the engine only, without any assets. This may feel small nowadays, especially with gigabytes we're used to see
on desktop and console games, but it is way too large for Web "instant games".

We have a few ideas in mind to address this, and it could even help optimize builds for other platforms!

If you know C/C++, you're familiar with the Web APIs and you feel contributing,
don't hesitate to join our
[#web team](https://chat.godotengine.org/channel/web) on the
[Godot Engine developers chat](https://chat.godotengine.org).
```
